# Visually Balanced Cartograms

Visually Balanced Cartograms (VBC's) are both a method, as well as a mapping type. I am not the inventor of this method, but I find them very useful and interesting and have decided to spend a portion of my paternity leave exploring them. I have choosen to create this github repository to use as a diary, or exploration log. I wish to begin my first entry with a link to the article that introduced me VBC's pubished in the [Jornal of Maps, volume 14 (2018) by European scholars Richard Harris, Martin Charlton, and Chris Brundson](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17445647.2018.1478753). Found in the references are four other related works by Richard Harris. My first step in exploring VBC's will be to review these journal articles. At this point, I am not sure what will come out of my exploration; perhaps this effort will only satisfy my curiosity and provide me with the information to make useful VBC's, perhaps as a result I can create some how-to instructions so others can use the VBC's method, or perhaps this exploration will result in ideas for adding to the VBC's as a methodology that I can publish here on GitHub and/or peer reviewed journal. 

Explore these publications first:
1. [Mapping the changing residential geography of White British secondary school children in England using visually balanced cartograms and hexograms](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17445647.2018.1478753)
2. [Measuring the scales of segregation: looking at the residential separation of White British and other schoolchildren in England using a multilevel index of dissimilarity](https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/tran.12181)
3. [Balancing visibility and distortion: Remapping the results of the 2015 UK General Election](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0308518X17708439)
4. [Tackling the Curse of Cartograms: addressing misrepresentation due to invisibility and to distortion](https://huckg.is/gisruk2017/GISRUK_2017_paper_29.pdf)
5. [Implementing a Multilevel Index of Dissimilarity in R with a case study of the changing scales of residential ethnic segregation in England and Wales](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2399808317748328)

# Lit Review
Goal: As I conduct this literature review I am paying attention to two things: (1) is the paper showing how VBC's can be used to solve a problem (use-cases), and (2) is the paper describing how VBC's are created, exposing the methods, thus providing a chance for new researchers, like me, to try and come up with a new way to expand the methodology, to build a new feature or improve an old feature. I am more interested in papers that focus on the second because I would love to contribute to the advancement of VBC's using R. But, I also think reading VBC's use-cases is important because those examples will show me how the literature describes VBC's as a solution.
#### [Mapping the changing residential geography of White British secondary school children in England using visually balanced cartograms and hexograms](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/17445647.2018.1478753)
- Use-case: better show changes in racial residential segregation (VBC's address the invisibility problem - imagine creating a state map using census tract geographies, the small urban tracts will be so small to see they will be 'invisible'; VBC's also address the cartogram distortion problem - typical cartograms distort geogrphic boundaries so much, the real geography of a place is lost).
- Critiquing: I am about to give my first critque. Before I do, I want to remind myself 'just because a critque comes to mind, does not mean spending time typing out the critque is a valuable use of time and space in this exploration log; don't waste valuable resources on non-helpful critques'. With that said, here's a non-helpful critque (so I can get one out of my system). To provide quantitative support to the claim that there is an invisibility problem, the authors calculate the spearman rank corrleation between the area of a geographic unit, and the number of people in that unit. The coefficant was weak, -0.175, so this shows that there are large numbers of people in small and large geographic units. I believe the authors are trying to say this means if we can't see the samll areas, there are places with large populations we won't see. But I think there must be a better way to measure/support the claim that invisibility exists as a problem. I'll leave it at that. Maybe this will turn into a helpfulf critque later.

